README.md, before:

This is the source for the blog.wallaroolabs.com blog.

## Hugo

The Pony website is generated using [Hugo]: a static website generator. If you are making larger changes to the site, you will need to install Hugo locally to verify your changes are working.

Because the site is deploying using a remote server, you should make sure you are developing using whatever version the deploy server is currently run

## blog.wallaroolabs.com hosting

Ponylang.org is hosted using [Netlify].

## Setting up your author info

The first time you go to write a blog post, you should first set up your author info and commit and push that. You only need to do this one time.

In the `data/author` folder, create a new json file with your author info. The name of the file should match the author name you will use in your blog post front matter.

For example, in my posts, I put `author = "seantallen"` so my author file is called `seantallen.json`

Your json file needs to contain 3 pieces of information, your name as it will be displayed on the website, your short bio (can include markdown formatting), and the name of your avatar image. 

When setting up your author info, be sure to include your avatar file in `static/images/author`.

## Creating a blog post

First things first, its good to know the name of your post or at least a 
working title. This title will be used when picking a name for the post's file.
Create a feature branch for your post, I suggest using your post name as the branch name so, if your title was "Hello Wallaroo" then your branch would be called "hello-wallaroo". Once you are working on a new branch, you will need hugo to create your post file with our standard Wallaroo Labs front-matter. If your title is "Hello Wallaroo" then you would create the post by running:

```bash
hugo new post/hello-wallaroo.md
```

This will create a new blog post with our standard front-matter in the `content/post` directory. If your post needs images, downloads etc, you should create a directory in `static/images` such as `static/images/hello-wallaroo`. This can then be referenced from your post markdown as `/images/hello-wallaroo`. Yes, all these things might not technically be images but, don't worry about it.

## Standard Wallaroo Labs post front-matter

When you create a blog post using the above instructions, standard Wallaroo Labs front-matter will be automatically populated with some default values:

```toml
+++
title = "example"
slug = "post-url-name"
draft = false
date = "2017-03-02T15:20:13-05:00"
categories = ["category 1","category 2"]
tags = ["tag 1","tag 2"]
description = "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Earum similique, ipsum officia amet blanditiis provident ratione nihil ipsam dolorem repellat."
author = "Author Name"
+++
```

Let's quickly run through each.

* Title is the title of your post
* Slug is used in the url. Once the post is published, this should never change. If you post is called "Hello Wallaroo" then the slug should be "hello-wallaroo"
* Leave draft as false. That way it will appear in Netlify previews and on the site when we merge our PR.
* Date you should date to the current date and time right before your PR is merged.
* Categories are used to group a series of posts together. For example, our series of posts introducing the world to Wallaroo is under the category "Hello Wallaroo". Categories should be used for a related series of posts that you would expect benefit from being read in order. You can [check the website](http://blog.wallaroolabs.com/categories/) to see existing categories.
* Tags are a free form way of orthogonally organizing posts. Example tags include "performance", "scaling", "wallaroo", "exactly-once" etc. Use whatever tags seem appropriate on your post. Before creating a new tag, [check the website](http://blog.wallaroolabs.com/tags/) to see if there is already an existing appropriate tag.
* Description is a short description of your post. It is optional. If it exists, it will be used on the main index page as the summary of the post and in page metadata where it will be picked up by search engines, twitter and such.
* Author is your author name. Make sure this is correct as it will be used to automatically populate your author info on the blog post. See the earlier "Setting up your author info" section of this document for more information

## Viewing your post

```bash
hugo server 
```

will render the website and start up a server. You can view the server running locally on [localhost:1313](http://localhost:1313).

## Publishing your post

When the time has come to publish your post, update the front-matter so that...

* `date` is set to the current date and time

Then open a PR against this repo. Netlify offers "deploy previews" that allow you to view the results of a PR before it goes live. To see the preview, on the PR page select `Show all checks` and then click `Details` next to `deploy/netlify - Deploy preview is ready!` Once you know everything is building, find someone who will do a final review of your post and assign them as a reviewer.

The final reviewer should check out your PR branch and verify that the post builds and that everything looks good, there are no broken images etc. Once they have verified everything is good they should

* `Rebase and merge` the post using the GitHub UI
* Delete the branch for the post using the GitHub UI

## Developing locally with Hugo

To do larger changes, you'll want to install Hugo locally so you can test your changes. For detailed instructions on using [Hugo], please refer to its website.

For simpler tasks, once you have Hugo installed, you should be able to:

```bash
cd blog.wallaroolabs.com
hugo server
```

Which will start up a local webserver that will serve the Ponylang website on `http://localhost:1313`. Generated content will be placed in the `public` folder which is ignored by git. Do not check in any generated content to the `source` branch.

Once you are happy with your changes, commit then and submit a PR. .

## How to submit a pull request

Once your content is done, please open a pull request against this repo with your changes. Based on the state of your particular PR, a number of requests for change might be requested:

* Changes to the content
* Changes to where the content is stored in the repo
* Changes to how the content falls into the overall site organization
* Changes to make sure that new content works across a variety of devices

Be sure to keep your PR to a single topic or logical change. If you are working on multiple changes, make sure they are each on their own branch and that before creating a new branch that you are on the master branch (others multiple changes might end up in your pull request). To repeat, each PR should be for a single logical change. We request that you create a good commit messages as laid out in ['How to Write a Git Commit Message'](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).

If your PR is for a single logical change (which is should be) but spans multiple commits, we'll ask you to squash them into a single commit before we merge. Steve Klabnik wrote a handy guide for that: [How to squash commits in a GitHub pull request](http://blog.steveklabnik.com/posts/2012-11-08-how-to-squash-commits-in-a-github-pull-request).

## Relative vs Absolute links

Favor relative links for any content on blog.wallaroolabs.com. Absolute links that point to `https://blog.wallaroolabs.com` don't play well with Netlify deploy previews. Absolute links will redirect you off the preview website and onto the live website. For this reason, relative links are preferred.

## More...

If you need to learn more, talk to someone on the team, read the hugo documentation and check out the output from its help command.

[Hugo]: https://gohugo.io
[Netlify]: https://www.netlify.com/.

Commit message:

Change Pony website refs to Wallaroo Labs blog
Changed the references to "Pony website" and "ponylang.org" to "Wallaroo Labs blog" and "blog.wallaroolabs.com" in order to avoid confusion.

README.md, after:

This is the source for the blog.wallaroolabs.com blog.

## Hugo

The Wallaroo Labs blog is generated using [Hugo]: a static website generator. If you are making larger changes to the site, you will need to install Hugo locally to verify your changes are working.

Because the site is deploying using a remote server, you should make sure you are developing using whatever version the deploy server is currently run

## blog.wallaroolabs.com hosting

blog.wallaroolabs.com is hosted using [Netlify].

## Setting up your author info

The first time you go to write a blog post, you should first set up your author info and commit and push that. You only need to do this one time.

In the `data/author` folder, create a new json file with your author info. The name of the file should match the author name you will use in your blog post front matter.

For example, in my posts, I put `author = "seantallen"` so my author file is called `seantallen.json`

Your json file needs to contain 3 pieces of information, your name as it will be displayed on the website, your short bio (can include markdown formatting), and the name of your avatar image. 

When setting up your author info, be sure to include your avatar file in `static/images/author`.

## Creating a blog post

First things first, its good to know the name of your post or at least a 
working title. This title will be used when picking a name for the post's file.
Create a feature branch for your post, I suggest using your post name as the branch name so, if your title was "Hello Wallaroo" then your branch would be called "hello-wallaroo". Once you are working on a new branch, you will need hugo to create your post file with our standard Wallaroo Labs front-matter. If your title is "Hello Wallaroo" then you would create the post by running:

```bash
hugo new post/hello-wallaroo.md
```

This will create a new blog post with our standard front-matter in the `content/post` directory. If your post needs images, downloads etc, you should create a directory in `static/images` such as `static/images/hello-wallaroo`. This can then be referenced from your post markdown as `/images/hello-wallaroo`. Yes, all these things might not technically be images but, don't worry about it.

## Standard Wallaroo Labs post front-matter

When you create a blog post using the above instructions, standard Wallaroo Labs front-matter will be automatically populated with some default values:

```toml
+++
title = "example"
slug = "post-url-name"
draft = false
date = "2017-03-02T15:20:13-05:00"
categories = ["category 1","category 2"]
tags = ["tag 1","tag 2"]
description = "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Earum similique, ipsum officia amet blanditiis provident ratione nihil ipsam dolorem repellat."
author = "Author Name"
+++
```

Let's quickly run through each.

* Title is the title of your post
* Slug is used in the url. Once the post is published, this should never change. If you post is called "Hello Wallaroo" then the slug should be "hello-wallaroo"
* Leave draft as false. That way it will appear in Netlify previews and on the site when we merge our PR.
* Date you should date to the current date and time right before your PR is merged.
* Categories are used to group a series of posts together. For example, our series of posts introducing the world to Wallaroo is under the category "Hello Wallaroo". Categories should be used for a related series of posts that you would expect benefit from being read in order. You can [check the website](http://blog.wallaroolabs.com/categories/) to see existing categories.
* Tags are a free form way of orthogonally organizing posts. Example tags include "performance", "scaling", "wallaroo", "exactly-once" etc. Use whatever tags seem appropriate on your post. Before creating a new tag, [check the website](http://blog.wallaroolabs.com/tags/) to see if there is already an existing appropriate tag.
* Description is a short description of your post. It is optional. If it exists, it will be used on the main index page as the summary of the post and in page metadata where it will be picked up by search engines, twitter and such.
* Author is your author name. Make sure this is correct as it will be used to automatically populate your author info on the blog post. See the earlier "Setting up your author info" section of this document for more information

## Viewing your post

```bash
hugo server 
```

will render the website and start up a server. You can view the server running locally on [localhost:1313](http://localhost:1313).

## Publishing your post

When the time has come to publish your post, update the front-matter so that...

* `date` is set to the current date and time

Then open a PR against this repo. Netlify offers "deploy previews" that allow you to view the results of a PR before it goes live. To see the preview, on the PR page select `Show all checks` and then click `Details` next to `deploy/netlify - Deploy preview is ready!` Once you know everything is building, find someone who will do a final review of your post and assign them as a reviewer.

The final reviewer should check out your PR branch and verify that the post builds and that everything looks good, there are no broken images etc. Once they have verified everything is good they should

* `Rebase and merge` the post using the GitHub UI
* Delete the branch for the post using the GitHub UI

## Developing locally with Hugo

To do larger changes, you'll want to install Hugo locally so you can test your changes. For detailed instructions on using [Hugo], please refer to its website.

For simpler tasks, once you have Hugo installed, you should be able to:

```bash
cd blog.wallaroolabs.com
hugo server
```

Which will start up a local webserver that will serve the Wallaroo Labs blog on `http://localhost:1313`. Generated content will be placed in the `public` folder which is ignored by git. Do not check in any generated content to the `source` branch.

Once you are happy with your changes, commit then and submit a PR. .

## How to submit a pull request

Once your content is done, please open a pull request against this repo with your changes. Based on the state of your particular PR, a number of requests for change might be requested:

* Changes to the content
* Changes to where the content is stored in the repo
* Changes to how the content falls into the overall site organization
* Changes to make sure that new content works across a variety of devices

Be sure to keep your PR to a single topic or logical change. If you are working on multiple changes, make sure they are each on their own branch and that before creating a new branch that you are on the master branch (others multiple changes might end up in your pull request). To repeat, each PR should be for a single logical change. We request that you create a good commit messages as laid out in ['How to Write a Git Commit Message'](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).

If your PR is for a single logical change (which is should be) but spans multiple commits, we'll ask you to squash them into a single commit before we merge. Steve Klabnik wrote a handy guide for that: [How to squash commits in a GitHub pull request](http://blog.steveklabnik.com/posts/2012-11-08-how-to-squash-commits-in-a-github-pull-request).

## Relative vs Absolute links

Favor relative links for any content on blog.wallaroolabs.com. Absolute links that point to `https://blog.wallaroolabs.com` don't play well with Netlify deploy previews. Absolute links will redirect you off the preview website and onto the live website. For this reason, relative links are preferred.

## More...

If you need to learn more, talk to someone on the team, read the hugo documentation and check out the output from its help command.

[Hugo]: https://gohugo.io
[Netlify]: https://www.netlify.com/.
