content/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy.md, before:

+++
title = "Spinning up a Wallaroo cluster is easy"
date = 2018-10-15T00:00:00-07:00
draft = false
author = "simonzelazny"
description = "In which we scale our app out, using a temporary cloud-based cluster"
tags = [
    "batch-processing",
    "data-engineering",
    "pandas"
]
categories = [
    "Data Science at Scale"
]
+++

## Oh no, more data!

Last month, we took a [long-running pandas classifier](/2018/09/make-python-pandas-go-fast/) and made it run faster by leveraging Wallaroo's parallelization capabilities. This time around, we'd like to kick it up a notch and see if we can keep scaling out to meet higher demand. We’d also like to be as economical as possible: provision infrastructure as needed and de-provision it when we’re done processing

__________________________
If you don’t feel like reading the post linked above, here’s a short summary of the situation: there’s a batch job that you’re running every hour, on the hour. This job receives a CSV file and classifies each row of the file, using a Pandas-based algorithm. The run-time of the job is starting to near the one-hour mark, and there’s concern that the pipeline will break down once the input data grows past a particular point.

In the blog post, we show how to split up the input data into smaller dataframes, and distribute them among workers in an ad-hoc Wallaroo cluster, running on one physical machine. Parallelizing the work in this manner buys us a lot of time, and the batch job can continue processing increasing amounts of data.
__________________________


Sure, we can handle a million rows in reasonable time, but what if the data set grows by orders of magnitude? By running our classifier on a local
Wallaroo cluster, we were able to cut the processing time of a million rows to
~16 minutes, thus fitting within our allotted time slot of one hour. But if the
input data is, say, 10x more, we’re going to have a hard time processing it all locally.

Let's see how we can keep up with the data growth by launching a cloud-based
Wallaroo cluster on-demand, running the job, collecting the data, and shutting down the
cluster, all in a fully automated fashion.


## Tools of the trade

Wallaroo's big idea is that your application doesn't have to know whether it's
running on one process, several local processes, or a distributed system
comprising many physical machines. In this sense, there's no extra work
involved in 'migrating' our classifier application from the previous blog post.

We will need some tools to help us set up and manage our cluster in the
cloud. Wallaroo can work with a lot of different tools. [Our friends at
Pulumi](https://pulumi.io) provide an excellent tool that removes the headaches
involved in provisioning infrastructure. We’ll use Pulumi to define, set up,
and finally tear down our processing cluster in this example.

We'll also need [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) to start, stop, and inspect the state of our
cluster, and, last but not least, we'll need an [AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/) account where our machines will live.

Let's jump into it!


## A sample run

First of all, if you'd like to follow along (and spend some money provisioning
EC2 servers), please [download and set up Pulumi](https://pulumi.io/quickstart/install.html).

Next, [clone the wallaroo blog examples repo](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples) and navigate to `provisioned-classifier`. If you followed along with the previous Pandas blog
post, you'll find our old application nested away here, under`classifier`. What's more interesting are the two new directories: `pulumi` and `ansible`.

Without delving into details, let's see how to run our application on a
freshly-provisioned cluster in the EC2 cloud:

```
    make up run-cluster get-results down INPUT_LINES=1000000 CLUSTER_SIZE=3
```


![An animation of the provisioning in action](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/tty-fast.gif)


Let's break that down and see what's really going on here.

1) `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=3` configures the cluster to consist of 3 machines,
and delegates to `pulumi up` the actual business of spinning up the
infrastructure. Our physical cluster will contain 3 nodes for processing, and
one extra 'coordinator' node for coordinating the work, hosting our [Metrics
UI](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/metrics/metrics-ui.html), and collecting results.

2) Once provisioning is complete, the next make task: `run-cluster
INPUT_LINES=1000000` uses our Ansible playbooks to upload application code from
`classifier/*` to all 3 machines provisioned above, and then start up a Wallaroo
cluster with 7 worker processes per machine.

Next, Ansible starts sending 1 million lines of our [synthetic CSV data](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/bin/send.py), and
waits for 1 million lines to arrive at the `data_reciever` process. When those lines
arrive, they are compressed, and the cluster is shut down.

3) `make get-results` Pulls the compressed result file to `output/results.tgz`,

4) And finally, `make down` destroys the cloud infrastructure that was used to
power our computation.


## The Pulumi cluster definition

Let's take a look at how our infrastructure is defined. This is the core of the
[definition](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/pulumi/index.js):

```javascript
function instance(name) {
  return new aws.ec2.Instance(
    name,
    {associatePublicIpAddress: true,
     instanceType: instanceType,
     securityGroups: [secGrp.name],
     ami: ami,
     tags: {"Name": name},
     keyName: keyPair.keyName})
}

let coordinator = instance("classifier-coordinator");
let initializer = instance("classifier-initializer");
let workers = [];
for(var i=0; i<clusterSize-1; i++){
  workers.push(instance("classifier-"+(i+1).toString()));
}
```

As you can see from the above, our little `instance()` function encapsulates
the common settings for every machine that we want to provision.

The `coordinator` and `initializer` are `ec2.Instance` objects with descriptive
names, while the `workers` are `ec2.Instance`s that are distinguished solely by
their ordinal number. Pulumi lets us define -- in code -- things like Security
Groups, SSH keypairs, and practically every other aspect of cloud
infrastructure.

An example of this capability is the `keyPair` object that's used to access
the instances via SSH. Our Makefile ensures that an ssh key is generated on-the-fly for our cluster, and Pulumi knows how to use it to set up SSH access for newly-provisioned nodes:

```javascript
let pubKey = fs.readFileSync("../ssh_pubkey_in_ec2_format.pub").toString();
let keyPair = new aws.ec2.KeyPair("ClassifierKey", {publicKey: pubKey});
```

With the relevant bits of our computing infrastructure thus defined, we can
tell Pulumi to take action in the real world and make it conform to our definition:

When we run `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=3`, we'll see Pulumi output something like
the following:

```
Performing changes:
 +  pulumi:pulumi:Stack classifier-classifier-demo creating
 +  aws:ec2:KeyPair ClassifierKey creating

(...)

 +  aws:ec2:Instance classifier-2 created

    ---outputs:---
    coordinator: [
        [0]: {
            name      : "classifier-coordinator"
            private_ip: "172.31.47.236"
            public_dns: "ec2-54-245-53-87.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com"
        }

  (...)

    ]

info: 7 changes performed:
    + 7 resources created
Update duration: 1m59.524017637s
```

We can use Pulumi's output to stitch together an Ansible inventory, which will
let us interact programmatically with our provisioned instances.

If we want to modify our cluster, we can edit `pulumi/index.js`, and then
rerun `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=N`. If the changes don't require restarting the
instances (for example if they only concern the Security Group), Pulumi will do
the right thing and not disturb the rest of the infrastructure.

If you examine the Pulumi definition file in depth, you'll see that it relies
on a mystery AMI: `ami-058d2ca16567a23f7`. This is an experimental ubuntu-based
image, with Wallaroo binaries (`machida`, `cluster_shutdown`,
`cluster_shrinker`, and `data_receiver`) pre-loaded. For now, it only exists in
the `us-west-2` AWS region, but we hope to make Wallaroo AMIs available for
experimentation in all regions starting with the next Wallaroo release.


## Running the computation

Now that we know what magic powers conjured up our AWS infrastructure, let's
take a look at how we use it to run our task. Fundamentally, the components of
our cluster can be described as follows:

1) The data source -- In our case it's the file [send.py](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/bin/send.py), which can generate
and transmit randomly-generated CSV data for our computation to consume.

2) The machida processes: one Initializer and a bunch of Workers. The
distinction between the two is only relevant at cluster startup.

3) The data receiver -- A process that listens on a TCP port for the output of
our computation. This is the `data_receiver`, provided as part of a Wallaroo
installation.

4) The metrics UI -- Our [Elixir-powered realtime dashboard](/2018/04/choosing-elixirs-phoenix-to-power-a-real-time-web-ui/).


Our Ansible playbook takes care of coordinating the launch of the various
components and making sure that their input, output and control ports match
up. In particular, that the cluster initializer starts up knowing the total
number of workers in the cluster, and every other worker connects to the
cluster's internal IP and control port. [See here](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/running-wallaroo/running-wallaroo.html) if you're
interested in a detailed discussion of clustering.

This is what ends up running on the servers when we launch our Ansible playbooks:

![Cluster diagram](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/cluster_diagram.png)


Once the cluster is up and running, and the initializer node's [tcp source](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/classifier/classifier.py#L17)
is listening for connections, we start up the `sender` and instruct it
to send a stream of data to the TCP Source. In a realistic batch scenario, this
sender could be implemented as a [Connector](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/python/using-connectors.html) that reads a
particular file from a remote filesystem or S3. For our purposes, we'll
simulate this by generating a set number of CSV lines on-demand, and then
shutting down.

While the work is being performed, we can take a look at the metrics URL
printed out on the screen to find out how the work is being distributed.

```
To see the cluster's real-time metrics, please visit
http://ec2-54-200-198-6.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000
```

![Distribution of work across workers](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_distribution.png)


In the screenshot above, you can see that the `Initializer` and `B03a909b23`
nodes are processing about 4k messages per second each, and all the other
workers have the classification work split evenly among them. Don't be
surprised that two of the workers are processing orders of magnitude more
messages! Remember our [pandas application pipeline](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/classifier/classifier.py#L11-L21)?

```python
    ab.new_pipeline("Classifier",
                    wallaroo.TCPSourceConfig(in_host, in_port, decode))
    ab.to_stateful(batch_rows, RowBuffer, "CSV rows + global header state")
    ab.to_parallel(classify)
    ab.to_sink(wallaroo.TCPSinkConfig(out_host, out_port, encode))
    return ab.build()

```

The CSV rows come in one-by-one, but we batch them and convert them to
dataframes of a hundred, so that our classification algorithm can tackle more
than one row at a time. Worker `B03a909b23` just happens to be the worker where our
state named "CSV rows + global header state" lives. Let's take a look at its metrics:

![Batcher metrics](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_on_batcher_node.png)


Indeed, we can see that this worker is processing about 4k/sec messages in the
"Batch Rows Of Csv, Emit Dataframes" step. Every other worker is busy
classifying! Let's see the breakdown for a different, random worker:

![Classifier metrics](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_on_normal_node.png)


Looking good. All that's left for us to do is wait till the job completes and
we receive our zipped data onto our disk.


## The numbers!

As a reminder, let's take a look at the numbers we obtained by running our classifier on a single `c5.4xlarge` instance in AWS:


#### Single-machine running times (no provisioning)

| CSV rows      | 1 worker | 4 workers | 8 workers |
|---------------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| 10 000        | 39s      | 20s       | 11s       |
| 100 000       | 6m28s    | 3m16s     | 1m41s     |
| 1 000 000     | 1h03m46s | 32m12s    | 16m33s    |

Now, let's see how much speedup we can achieve from scaling out with our
provisioned-on-demand infrastructure.


#### Multi-machine running times (setup & teardown included)

| CSV rows      | 4x7 = 28 workers | 8x7 = 56 workers | 16x7 = 112 workers |
|---------------|------------------|------------------|--------------------|
| 1 000 000     |    11m40s       |  12m30s   | 15m40s        |
| 10 000 000    |    43m50s      |  36m30s   |  32m30s       |

As you can see from the table above, the fact that we spin up infrastructure on demand plays a big role in the run-time of our batch jobs. It seems that a cluster of 4 machines hits a sweet-spot between price and performance -- we can handle 10x more data and still fit in the hour-long window allotted for our application, and not have to wait for a big cluster to spin up and then back down.

## Conclusion

The above figures illustrate how Wallaroo can be used as an ad-hoc compute
cloud, using Pulumi and Ansible to provision, run workloads remotely, and shut
down the infrastructure once the results are in.

In the case or our batch job, we can leverage this pattern to scale
horizontally on-demand, even when the incoming workloads exceed the capacity of
one physical machine -- all while running the exact same Wallaroo application
that we run locally as part of our regular development! Wallaroo handles the
scale-aware layer of our program, so we can focus on the business logic and
flow of our data.

If you're hitting into limits running your hourly, daily or nightly batch jobs
and are looking into scaling out horizontally, don't hesitate to reach out
to [Sean](mailto:sean@wallaroolabs.com) or drop in to our IRC channel. We'd
love to chat!

Commit message:

Rename coordinator to metrics_host

content/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy.md, after:

+++
title = "Spinning up a Wallaroo cluster is easy"
date = 2018-10-15T00:00:00-07:00
draft = false
author = "simonzelazny"
description = "In which we scale our app out, using a temporary cloud-based cluster"
tags = [
    "batch-processing",
    "data-engineering",
    "pandas"
]
categories = [
    "Data Science at Scale"
]
+++

## Oh no, more data!

Last month, we took a [long-running pandas classifier](/2018/09/make-python-pandas-go-fast/) and made it run faster by leveraging Wallaroo's parallelization capabilities. This time around, we'd like to kick it up a notch and see if we can keep scaling out to meet higher demand. We’d also like to be as economical as possible: provision infrastructure as needed and de-provision it when we’re done processing

__________________________
If you don’t feel like reading the post linked above, here’s a short summary of the situation: there’s a batch job that you’re running every hour, on the hour. This job receives a CSV file and classifies each row of the file, using a Pandas-based algorithm. The run-time of the job is starting to near the one-hour mark, and there’s concern that the pipeline will break down once the input data grows past a particular point.

In the blog post, we show how to split up the input data into smaller dataframes, and distribute them among workers in an ad-hoc Wallaroo cluster, running on one physical machine. Parallelizing the work in this manner buys us a lot of time, and the batch job can continue processing increasing amounts of data.
__________________________


Sure, we can handle a million rows in reasonable time, but what if the data set grows by orders of magnitude? By running our classifier on a local
Wallaroo cluster, we were able to cut the processing time of a million rows to
~16 minutes, thus fitting within our allotted time slot of one hour. But if the
input data is, say, 10x more, we’re going to have a hard time processing it all locally.

Let's see how we can keep up with the data growth by launching a cloud-based
Wallaroo cluster on-demand, running the job, collecting the data, and shutting down the
cluster, all in a fully automated fashion.


## Tools of the trade

Wallaroo's big idea is that your application doesn't have to know whether it's
running on one process, several local processes, or a distributed system
comprising many physical machines. In this sense, there's no extra work
involved in 'migrating' our classifier application from the previous blog post.

We will need some tools to help us set up and manage our cluster in the
cloud. Wallaroo can work with a lot of different tools. [Our friends at
Pulumi](https://pulumi.io) provide an excellent tool that removes the headaches
involved in provisioning infrastructure. We’ll use Pulumi to define, set up,
and finally tear down our processing cluster in this example.

We'll also need [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) to start, stop, and inspect the state of our
cluster, and, last but not least, we'll need an [AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/) account where our machines will live.

Let's jump into it!


## A sample run

First of all, if you'd like to follow along (and spend some money provisioning
EC2 servers), please [download and set up Pulumi](https://pulumi.io/quickstart/install.html).

Next, [clone the wallaroo blog examples repo](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples) and navigate to `provisioned-classifier`. If you followed along with the previous Pandas blog
post, you'll find our old application nested away here, under`classifier`. What's more interesting are the two new directories: `pulumi` and `ansible`.

Without delving into details, let's see how to run our application on a
freshly-provisioned cluster in the EC2 cloud:

```
    make up run-cluster get-results down INPUT_LINES=1000000 CLUSTER_SIZE=3
```


![An animation of the provisioning in action](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/tty-fast.gif)


Let's break that down and see what's really going on here.

1) `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=3` configures the cluster to consist of 3 machines,
and delegates to `pulumi up` the actual business of spinning up the
infrastructure. Our physical cluster will contain 3 nodes for processing, and
one extra metrics_host node for hosting our [Metrics
UI](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/metrics/metrics-ui.html), and collecting
results.

2) Once provisioning is complete, the next make task: `run-cluster
INPUT_LINES=1000000` uses our Ansible playbooks to upload application code from
`classifier/*` to all 3 machines provisioned above, and then start up a Wallaroo
cluster with 7 worker processes per machine.

Next, Ansible starts sending 1 million lines of our [synthetic CSV data](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/bin/send.py), and
waits for 1 million lines to arrive at the `data_reciever` process. When those lines
arrive, they are compressed, and the cluster is shut down.

3) `make get-results` Pulls the compressed result file to `output/results.tgz`,

4) And finally, `make down` destroys the cloud infrastructure that was used to
power our computation.


## The Pulumi cluster definition

Let's take a look at how our infrastructure is defined. This is the core of the
[definition](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/pulumi/index.js):

```javascript
function instance(name) {
  return new aws.ec2.Instance(
    name,
    {associatePublicIpAddress: true,
     instanceType: instanceType,
     securityGroups: [secGrp.name],
     ami: ami,
     tags: {"Name": name},
     keyName: keyPair.keyName})
}

let metrics_host = instance("classifier-metrics_host");
let initializer = instance("classifier-initializer");
let workers = [];
for(var i=0; i<clusterSize-1; i++){
  workers.push(instance("classifier-"+(i+1).toString()));
}
```

As you can see from the above, our little `instance()` function encapsulates
the common settings for every machine that we want to provision.

The `metrics_host` and `initializer` are `ec2.Instance` objects with descriptive
names, while the `workers` are `ec2.Instance`s that are distinguished solely by
their ordinal number. Pulumi lets us define -- in code -- things like Security
Groups, SSH keypairs, and practically every other aspect of cloud
infrastructure.

An example of this capability is the `keyPair` object that's used to access
the instances via SSH. Our Makefile ensures that an ssh key is generated on-the-fly for our cluster, and Pulumi knows how to use it to set up SSH access for newly-provisioned nodes:

```javascript
let pubKey = fs.readFileSync("../ssh_pubkey_in_ec2_format.pub").toString();
let keyPair = new aws.ec2.KeyPair("ClassifierKey", {publicKey: pubKey});
```

With the relevant bits of our computing infrastructure thus defined, we can
tell Pulumi to take action in the real world and make it conform to our definition:

When we run `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=3`, we'll see Pulumi output something like
the following:

```
Performing changes:
 +  pulumi:pulumi:Stack classifier-classifier-demo creating
 +  aws:ec2:KeyPair ClassifierKey creating

(...)

 +  aws:ec2:Instance classifier-2 created

    ---outputs:---
    metrics_host: [
        [0]: {
            name      : "classifier-metrics_host"
            private_ip: "172.31.47.236"
            public_dns: "ec2-54-245-53-87.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com"
        }

  (...)

    ]

info: 7 changes performed:
    + 7 resources created
Update duration: 1m59.524017637s
```

We can use Pulumi's output to stitch together an Ansible inventory, which will
let us interact programmatically with our provisioned instances.

If we want to modify our cluster, we can edit `pulumi/index.js`, and then
rerun `make up CLUSTER_SIZE=N`. If the changes don't require restarting the
instances (for example if they only concern the Security Group), Pulumi will do
the right thing and not disturb the rest of the infrastructure.

If you examine the Pulumi definition file in depth, you'll see that it relies
on a mystery AMI: `ami-058d2ca16567a23f7`. This is an experimental ubuntu-based
image, with Wallaroo binaries (`machida`, `cluster_shutdown`,
`cluster_shrinker`, and `data_receiver`) pre-loaded. For now, it only exists in
the `us-west-2` AWS region, but we hope to make Wallaroo AMIs available for
experimentation in all regions starting with the next Wallaroo release.


## Running the computation

Now that we know what magic powers conjured up our AWS infrastructure, let's
take a look at how we use it to run our task. Fundamentally, the components of
our cluster can be described as follows:

1) The data source -- In our case it's the file [send.py](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/bin/send.py), which can generate
and transmit randomly-generated CSV data for our computation to consume.

2) The machida processes: one Initializer and a bunch of Workers. The
distinction between the two is only relevant at cluster startup.

3) The data receiver -- A process that listens on a TCP port for the output of
our computation. This is the `data_receiver`, provided as part of a Wallaroo
installation.

4) The metrics UI -- Our [Elixir-powered realtime dashboard](/2018/04/choosing-elixirs-phoenix-to-power-a-real-time-web-ui/).


Our Ansible playbook takes care of coordinating the launch of the various
components and making sure that their input, output and control ports match
up. In particular, that the cluster initializer starts up knowing the total
number of workers in the cluster, and every other worker connects to the
cluster's internal IP and control port. [See here](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/running-wallaroo/running-wallaroo.html) if you're
interested in a detailed discussion of clustering.

This is what ends up running on the servers when we launch our Ansible playbooks:

![Cluster diagram](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/cluster_diagram.png)


Once the cluster is up and running, and the initializer node's [tcp source](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/classifier/classifier.py#L17)
is listening for connections, we start up the `sender` and instruct it
to send a stream of data to the TCP Source. In a realistic batch scenario, this
sender could be implemented as a [Connector](https://docs.wallaroolabs.com/book/python/using-connectors.html) that reads a
particular file from a remote filesystem or S3. For our purposes, we'll
simulate this by generating a set number of CSV lines on-demand, and then
shutting down.

While the work is being performed, we can take a look at the metrics URL
printed out on the screen to find out how the work is being distributed.

```
To see the cluster's real-time metrics, please visit
http://ec2-54-200-198-6.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000
```

![Distribution of work across workers](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_distribution.png)


In the screenshot above, you can see that the `Initializer` and `B03a909b23`
nodes are processing about 4k messages per second each, and all the other
workers have the classification work split evenly among them. Don't be
surprised that two of the workers are processing orders of magnitude more
messages! Remember our [pandas application pipeline](https://github.com/WallarooLabs/wallaroo_blog_examples/blob/master/provisioned-classifier/classifier/classifier.py#L11-L21)?

```python
    ab.new_pipeline("Classifier",
                    wallaroo.TCPSourceConfig(in_host, in_port, decode))
    ab.to_stateful(batch_rows, RowBuffer, "CSV rows + global header state")
    ab.to_parallel(classify)
    ab.to_sink(wallaroo.TCPSinkConfig(out_host, out_port, encode))
    return ab.build()

```

The CSV rows come in one-by-one, but we batch them and convert them to
dataframes of a hundred, so that our classification algorithm can tackle more
than one row at a time. Worker `B03a909b23` just happens to be the worker where our
state named "CSV rows + global header state" lives. Let's take a look at its metrics:

![Batcher metrics](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_on_batcher_node.png)


Indeed, we can see that this worker is processing about 4k/sec messages in the
"Batch Rows Of Csv, Emit Dataframes" step. Every other worker is busy
classifying! Let's see the breakdown for a different, random worker:

![Classifier metrics](/images/post/spinning-up-a-wallaroo-cluster-is-easy/work_on_normal_node.png)


Looking good. All that's left for us to do is wait till the job completes and
we receive our zipped data onto our disk.


## The numbers!

As a reminder, let's take a look at the numbers we obtained by running our classifier on a single `c5.4xlarge` instance in AWS:


#### Single-machine running times (no provisioning)

| CSV rows      | 1 worker | 4 workers | 8 workers |
|---------------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| 10 000        | 39s      | 20s       | 11s       |
| 100 000       | 6m28s    | 3m16s     | 1m41s     |
| 1 000 000     | 1h03m46s | 32m12s    | 16m33s    |

Now, let's see how much speedup we can achieve from scaling out with our
provisioned-on-demand infrastructure.


#### Multi-machine running times (setup & teardown included)

| CSV rows      | 4x7 = 28 workers | 8x7 = 56 workers | 16x7 = 112 workers |
|---------------|------------------|------------------|--------------------|
| 1 000 000     |    11m40s       |  12m30s   | 15m40s        |
| 10 000 000    |    43m50s      |  36m30s   |  32m30s       |



As you can see from the table above, the fact that we spin up infrastructure on
demand plays a big role in the run-time of our batch jobs. It seems that a
cluster of 4 machines hits a sweet-spot between price and performance -- we can
handle 10x more data and still fit in the hour-long window allotted for our
application, and not have to wait for a big cluster to spin up and then back
down.

## Conclusion

The above figures illustrate how Wallaroo can be used as an ad-hoc compute
cloud, using Pulumi and Ansible to provision, run workloads remotely, and shut
down the infrastructure once the results are in.

In the case or our batch job, we can leverage this pattern to scale
horizontally on-demand, even when the incoming workloads exceed the capacity of
one physical machine -- all while running the exact same Wallaroo application
that we run locally as part of our regular development! Wallaroo handles the
scale-aware layer of our program, so we can focus on the business logic and
flow of our data.

If you're hitting into limits running your hourly, daily or nightly batch jobs
and are looking into scaling out horizontally, don't hesitate to reach out
to [Sean](mailto:sean@wallaroolabs.com) or drop in to our IRC channel. We'd
love to chat!
